In April, China’s central bank has introduced a homegrown digital currency across four cities as part of a pilot program, marking a milestone on the path toward the first electronic payment system created by a major central bank. Dozens of central banks have started looking at whether to issue digital currencies. However, only a few have run trials and none has gone as far as China, which appears set to become the first country to put a central-bank digital currency (CBDC) into limited use. What are major differences between CBDC and bitcoin? What impact may it bring to the tools and effectiveness of monetary policy? In this article, we first demonstrate the background information about bitcoin. Then, its major differences with CBDC will be explained. In the next part, we will analyse how CBDC can affect monetary policy. In the end, evaluation about the issuance and a final conclusion will be given.
When the global financial crisis erupted in 2008, on November 1, 2008, a man who called himself Satoshi Nakamoto published a bitcoin white paper on the WEBSITE of the P2P Foundation, bitcoin: A Peer-to-peer Electronic Cash System, setting out his new vision for electronic money -- the creation of Bitcoin. On January 3, 2009, the bitcoin creation block was created. In contrast to legal tender, bitcoin does not have a centralized issuer, but is generated by the calculations of nodes on the network. Anyone can be involved in making bitcoin, which can be circulated around the world and bought and sold on any computer connected to the Internet. Anyone, no matter where they are, can mine, buy, sell or receive Bitcoin without identifying the user during the transaction. On January 5, 2009, Bitcoin, which is not controlled by the central bank or any financial institution, was born. Bitcoin is a digital currency that consists of complex strings of computer-generated code that are created through a preset program.

The Bitcoin network "mines" to generate new bitcoins. The so-called "mining" is essentially using a computer to solve a complex mathematical problem to ensure the consistency of the bitcoin network distributed accounting system. The bitcoin network automatically adjusts the difficulty of mathematical questions so that the entire network gets a qualified answer every 10 minutes or so. The bitcoin network then generates a certain amount of bitcoin as a block reward for the answer.

When Bitcoin was introduced in 2009, the block reward was 50 bitcoins. Ten minutes after it was created, the first 50 bitcoins were created, and the total amount of money at that time was 50. Bitcoin then grew at a rate of about 50 every 10 minutes. When the total amount reaches 10.5 million (50% of 21 million), the block awards will be halved to 25. When the total amount reaches 15.75 million (new output 5.25 million, or 50% of the 1,050), the block awards will be halved again to 12.5. The system was limited to no more than 10.5 million for four years, after which the total will be permanently limited to about 21 million.

The main difference between bitcoin and CBDC is that CBDC will be backed by PBoC but bitcoin is backed by no one. From this perspective, there isn’t much difference between CBDC and hard Chinese currency. Both are backed by the Chinese government.

It used to be before people’s currency was backed a physical asset like gold and people can exchange your currency at the central bank for gold. Nowadays, all currency is fiat money (money backed by government) but not by physical assets.

Therefore, the guarantee on the value of your money is backed by the government but bitcoin is purely speculative and backed by no one. That means it could very well fall to zero if no one believes it is worth anything. Apart from that, the money supply would be controlled by the PBoC but for bitcoin it increases at the rate of bitcoin mining that gets progressively slower until 21 million bitcoins are mined and it will be fixed at number forever. According to the data, by April 2020, 18.5 million bitcoins had already been mined and only 3 million more to go. Since the closer it gets to 21 million, the harder to mine bitcoin, it is predicted the final bitcoin will be mined at around 2140.

So, in the future, the money supply for bitcoin will be fixed forever at 21 million bitcoins. If anything, when people lose their bitcoin wallet etc., the money supply would actually decrease. The value of bitcoin should go up when MS decrease. It means people would hold on to bitcoin rather than spend it. We can see this as deflation of goods priced in bitcoin and what happens when there is deflation? People stop spending. It might even lead to bitcoin no longer being used as a currency to exchange goods and services but purely as a store of wealth.

Bitcoin would not last as a currency in the future because of this characteristic. Any currency where its money supply slowly decrease, would encourage people to hoard the currency as they expect its value to go up so it wouldn’t be used as form of money. The thing is once people realize no one is using it and everyone is just hoarding it for its own sake, it may actually suddenly become worthless when people realize it became a dead currency. It is hard for us to know how it goes, but from the analysis, we can see that it is hard for bitcoin to last as a form of money and for use as transaction.

From the perspective of monetary policy, one advantage of CBDC is clear: it can make monetary policy more effective since the central bank has much more control of the currency and can see the exact effects of monetary policy on how it affects the economy. Apart from that, the creation of CBDC can bring three major benefits.

a) Eliminate illicit transactions and money laundering through cash

Cash is completely anonymous, which gives it freedom to trade, but also makes it a vehicle for many illegal transactions, including drug dealing, gambling, graft and money laundering. If cash is electronically processed, every transaction can be recorded, limiting illegal activity. At present, non-cash transactions in Switzerland, Canada, the United Kingdom and other countries have accounted for more than half, and in China's major cities, cash has largely disappeared. Of course, this is not without its costs. In an era when citizens are becoming more and more privacy- conscious, a cashless society poses a great challenge to the trade-off between privacy and public information.

b) The possibility of negative interest rates

The second and biggest economic impact of central Banks' digital money is to make negative interest rates a viable tool for central Banks' monetary policy. In the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, central Banks tried to stimulate the shift from saving to spending by cutting interest rates and encouraging companies to finance themselves. But you can't go down to zero anymore. Because if we assume negative interest, we're going to see our bank balance get smaller and smaller, and people are going to withdraw cash from their savings and leave it at home. Because for cash, book value never goes down.

And once the cash for export is completely replaced by electronically controlled central bank money, negative rates will become possible. Negative interest rates can give central Banks more room to maneuver and imagine. However, this brings other problems. For example, when the economy starts to panic, people tend to move their deposits from commercial Banks to the central bank digital currency, because the central bank has the endorsement of the national credit, so theoretically there will be no default or bankruptcy, which is likely to cause a run on commercial Banks. Moreover, for the public, a nominal reduction in the amount of money on hand can cause panic and confusion over foreign exchange.

c) Direct central bank assistance to special groups

The third point, also at the monetary policy level, is that central bank digital money makes it possible to drop money from helicopters. The concept of helicopter drops was put forward by Nobel Prize-winning economist Friedman. During the economic depression, central bankers fly to drop money to the masses to stimulate consumption. But since the central bank does not have public accounts, the normal operation is for the central bank to give money to the Finance ministry, which then returns it in the form of a tax or something. If the central bank owned everyone's account directly, it could directly increase the paper wealth of individual accounts, and it could use data to provide specific assistance according to the geographical location, gender and age of the target.

The CBDC indeed brings almost a revolution to the banking system which creates an theoretically effective regulation method. But to be more specific, the general objective of a central bank is to achieve both monetary stability and financial stability.

Speaking about monetary stability, there are two types of competition among monetary instruments:”full” and “reduced.”

1. Full currency competition: Under full competition, currencies compete including in their role as unit of account. Competition takes place between monetary instruments denominated in different units of account, with different price systems and inflation rates. Currencies can compete internationally, as official fiat currencies do, or domestically, as long as private entities are permitted to issue their own curren- cies (as in the free banking era). Issuers are disciplined by the presence of reputable, well-established currencies with stable rates of inflation. This is the type of competition emphasized in the literature and by Hayek.

2. Reduced competition of monetary instruments: Under reduced competition, mon- etary instruments denominated in the same unit of account compete in their role as medium of exchange. This type of competition among monetary instruments is al- ready prevalent within countries. Deposits issued by different banks compete with each other and with electronic monetary instruments, such as tokens held in digital wallets. Regulators typically encourage competition among monetary instruments for the sake of efficiency.

Once CBDC has became the only currency availible for the public, the second competition mentioned above could be reduced or even eliminated. This is strongly believed promotes monetary stability as reducing competition and uncertainty. The convenience of CBDC and network could also promotes the using of it and so increases competitiveness globally. This would partially ease the full currency competition and globalises the currency.

Besides competition, the using of CBDC could also solving information failure, or even partially. With the recording of all the transactions and trades, central bank could gain more knowledge about the market and so the whole economy. For example carrying out a new policy such as increasing interest rates, the central bank could gain knowledges about any changes to the spending habits, and so measure the effectiveness of this policy which then make any changes to the policy to make it more appropriate. Information failure do have advantages in some special cases, without perfect knowledge, black market could exist due to the anonymous of the trade, whereas with the CBDC, every deal can be tracked and so regulated, which black markets will be no more available.

Market structure also experiences a tremendous change with the issuance of CBDC.

Economies are moving towards a regime where big technology companies are systematically important data intermediaries. Even today, there are concerns over these big companies which they have excessive power over users’ data. A good example would be Facebook been sued by the US government. But however, different monetary arrangements have different implications for who controls user data. In the current system, banks and credit card companies have the greatest access to transaction data. Whenever a transaction is made, either the bank or the credit card company can see exactly when, where, and how the transaction occurred. This data is then used primarily to score users on their creditworthiness, which permits lending institutions to decide the rates at which they will lend to each individual. The ownership structure of payment data could change drastically in an economy dominated by digital platforms. There are two important possibilities to consider. First, it could be that digital currency issuers emerge as important players in currency markets, but that individual bank accounts continue to interact with digital currencies in an important way. To a large extent, a transformation to this type of economy is currently underway in China. Alipay and WeChatPay issue large amounts of digital currency and operate applications that permit transfers to and from bank accounts. As a result, both the digital currency issuers and banks have access to some transaction data. A more radical departure from the system is one in which large digital issuers back their currencies with deposits held at large banks. The consumers then only hold digital currencies exclusively. Which is similar to the current situation, where consumers only hold deposits that are back by reserves but do not hold the reserves instead. Then the ownership structure of payment data could be totally different , if consumers only hold digital currencies, the issuer can then become monopoly holding these datas. If bank don’t buy these data from them, then they can’t regulate the trade. But however, since central bank becomes the issuer and the only owner of the data, it is expected being more effectively regulated.

Speaking about the issuance, there are different opinions from different point of view. From the Chinese government, the issuance would make the regulation of the banking system more efficiently and effectively, as well as the avoidance of black market and so a more healthy economic growth. It could also promote more appropriate monetary policies with the help of better informations. But from the consumers’ point of view, all the information about the trade will be tracked and so recorded, which some people might seen it as invading their privacy. But some might also think that it’s a more convenient way of spending rather than carrying paper bank notes all the time.

Eventhough CBDC seems like a good idea, but the reality is uncertain, which the effect and consequence of this pilot programme is unpredictable and uncontrollable. Especially during the time of COVID-19 epidemic, where both consumption and production needs to be promoted. The effect of this programme was aiming good but the real effect it could bring to the society could’ve been small or even negative. There’s a big chance of this programme to be failed due to the social attitudes towards consumption and production which both are in a relatively conservative state. So we would’ve recommande to take this pilot programme when the economy is in a growing stage to ensure the successfulness. It can’t be taken place where the economy is in a hyperinflation because the issuance of CBDC is expecting to boost the economy where leads to a higher level of hyperinflation which is a unwanted result.
